The President:
Over the past two years, more than seven million Americans
have lost their jobs, and factories and businesses across
our country have been shuttered.
In one way or another, we've
all been touched by the worst
economic downturn since
the Great Depression.
The difficult steps we've taken
since January have helped to
break our fall, and begin
to get us back on our feet.
The economy's growing again.
The flood of job losses we saw
at the beginning of this year
slowed to a relative
trickle last month.
These are all good
signs for the future,
but they're little comfort to all our neighbors who remain out
of a job.
And my solemn commitment
is to work every day,
in every way that I can, to push this recovery forward and build
a new foundation for our
lasting growth and prosperity.
That's why I announced some
additional steps this week to
spur private sector hiring.
We'll give an added boost to
small businesses across our
nation through additional tax
cuts and access to lending they
desperately need to grow.
We'll rebuild more of our vital
infrastructure and promote
advanced manufacturing in clean
energy to put Americans to work
doing the work we need done.
And I've called for the extension of unemployment
insurance and health benefits
to help those who've lost their
jobs weather these storms until
we reach that brighter day.
But even as we dig our
way out of this deep hole,
it's important that we address
the irresponsibility and
recklessness that got us into
this mess in the first place.
Some of it was the result
of an era of easy credit,
when millions of Americans
borrowed beyond their means,
bought homes they
couldn't afford,
and assumed that housing prices
would always rise and the day of
reckoning would never come.
But much of it was due to
the irresponsibility of large
financial institutions on Wall
Street that gambled on risky
loans and complex
financial products,
seeking short-term profits and
big bonuses with little regard
for long-term consequences.
It was, as some put it,
risk management without the management.
And their actions, in the
absence of strong oversight,
intensified the cycle of
bubble-and-bust and led to a
financial crisis that threatened
to bring down the entire economy.
It was a disaster that could
have been avoided if we'd had
clearer rules of the road
for Wall Street and actually
enforced them.
We can't change that history.
But we have an absolute
responsibility to learn from it,
and take steps to prevent a
repeat of the crisis from which
we're still recovering.
And that's why I've proposed a
series of financial reforms that
would target the abuses we've
seen and leave us less exposed
to the kind of breakdown
we just experienced.
They would bring new
transparency and accountability
to the financial markets, so
that the kind of risky dealings
that sparked the crisis would
be fully disclosed and properly regulated.
They would give us the tools to
ensure that the failure of one
large bank or financial
institution won't spread like a
virus throughout the
entire financial system.
Because we should never again
find ourselves in the position
in which our only choices are
bailing out banks or letting our
economy collapse.
And they would consolidate the
consumer protection functions
currently spread across half a
dozen agencies and vest them in
a new Consumer Financial
Protection Agency.
This agency would have the
authority to put an end to the
misleading and dishonest
practices by banks and
institutions that market
financial products like credit
cards and debit cards; mortgage and auto and payday loans.
These are all commonsense reforms that respond to the
obvious problems exposed
by the financial crisis.
But, as we've learned
so many times before,
common sense doesn't always
prevail in Washington.
Just this week, Republican
leaders in the House summoned
more than 100 key lobbyists for
the financial industry to a "pep
rally," and urged them to
redouble their efforts to block
meaningful financial reform.
Not that they needed
the encouragement.
The industry has already
spent more than $300 million on
lobbying to influence
the debate this year.
The special interests and their
agents in Congress claim that
reforms like the Consumer
Financial Protection Agency will
stifle consumer choice and that
updated rules and oversight will
frustrate innovation in
the financial markets.
But Americans don't choose to be
victimized by mysterious fees,
and changing terms, and pages
and pages of fine print.
And while innovation
should be encouraged,
risky schemes that threaten
our entire economy should not.
We can't afford to let the same
phony arguments and bad habits
of Washington kill financial
reform and leave American
consumers and our economy
vulnerable to another meltdown.
Yesterday, the House passed
comprehensive reform legislation
that incorporates many of the
essential changes we need,
and the Senate Banking Committee
is working on its own package of reforms.
I urge both houses to act as
quickly as possible to pass real
reform that restores free
and fair markets in which
recklessness and greed are
thwarted; and hard work,
responsibility, and
competition are rewarded --
reforms that work for
businesses, investors,
and consumers alike.
That's how we'll keep our
economy and our institutions strong.
That's how we'll restore a
sense of responsibility and
accountability to both
Wall Street and Washington.
And that's how we'll safeguard
everything the American people
are working so hard to build
-- a broad-based recovery;
lasting prosperity; and
a renewed American Dream.
Thanks.